Create pdf report of on demand ratio analyses (#21)
ccao-data/recurring-data-requests: ratio-analysis/ratio-analysis.qmd

  hi = c(1.10, 15.0, 1.03, 0.05, 1.10),
  mid = c(1.000, 10.0, 1.005, 0.00, 1.000),
  half_span = c(0.100, 5.0, 0.025, 0.05, 0.100),
  standard_label = c(
    "0.90 -- 1.10", "5.0 -- 15.0", "0.98 -- 1.03", "$\\pm$0.05", "0.90 -- 1.10"
  )
)

# Color palette
pal <- list(
  pass         = "A8DDB5",
  fail         = "FDBB84",
  model        = "#A569BD",
  desk_review  = "#2C2C2C",
  ratio_na     = "EEEEEE",
  ratio_colors = c("4575B4", "74ADD1", "66BD63", "FC8D59", "D73027"),
  ratio_values = c(0.70, 0.8999, 0.9001, 1.0999, 1.1001, 1.30),
  ratio_limits = c(0.70, 1.30),
  ratio_breaks = c(0.80, 0.90, 1.00, 1.10, 1.20),
  iaao_band    = "#A8DDB5"
)

iaao_check <- function(metric, value) {
  m <- metric_meta[metric_meta$name == metric, ]
  if (nrow(m) == 0) {
    return(NA)
  }
  value >= m$lo & value <= m$hi
}

iaao_color_cell <- function(metric, value) {
  m <- metric_meta[metric_meta$name == metric, ]
  digits <- if (nrow(m) > 0) m$digits else 4
  v <- round(value, digits)
  passes <- iaao_check(metric, value)
  if (is.na(passes)) {
    return(as.character(v))
  }
  hex <- if (passes) pal$pass else pal$fail
  paste0("\\cellcolor[HTML]{", hex, "} ", v)

> }

Reviewer: Hmm, this chunk code is a little confusing to me. Can you add comments to explain what's going on?

ratio_to_hex <- function(ratio) {
  rc <- pal$ratio_colors
  case_when(
    is.na(ratio) ~ pal$ratio_na,
    ratio < 0.80 ~ rc[1],
    ratio < 0.90 ~ rc[2],
    ratio <= 1.10 ~ rc[3],
    ratio <= 1.20 ~ rc[4],
    TRUE ~ rc[5]
  )
}

color_ratio_cell <- function(ratio, digits = 3) {
  v <- round(ratio, digits)
  hex <- ratio_to_hex(ratio)
  paste0("\\cellcolor[HTML]{", hex, "} ", v)
}

ratio_fill_scale <- function(name = "Median\nRatio") {
  rc <- paste0("#", pal$ratio_colors)
  scale_fill_gradientn(
    colors   = c(rc[1], rc[2], rc[3], rc[3], rc[4], rc[5]),
    values   = scales::rescale(pal$ratio_values),
    limits   = pal$ratio_limits,
    oob      = scales::squish,
    na.value = paste0("#", pal$ratio_na),
    breaks   = pal$ratio_breaks,
    labels   = sprintf("%.2f", pal$ratio_breaks),
    name     = name
  )
}

> caps <- list(

Reviewer: For ease of review and maintenance, can we have the text for the titles and captions positioned near or in the code producing each figure that they're used in? As in, the fig1 caption text here just becomes part of the fig1 code. (That way, it's easier for the reviewer; and if a figure itself is edited, it's a bit easier to confirm that the title and caption are correct.)

Author: Sure, I moved them up cause there were just a lot of chunks. Happy to move them back down.

    "\\newline Each labeled point is the median ratio within that",
    " sale price decile.",
    " Dotted lines show the IAAO acceptable range (0.9–1.1)."
  ),
  fig6 = glue("Ratio Curve by Sale Price Decile"),
  fig7 = glue(
    "Neighborhood Median Assessment Ratios.",
    "\\newline Green (0.90–1.10) meets the IAAO standard;",
    " Blue indicates under-assessment;",
    " Red indicates over-assessment."
  ),
  fig8 = glue(
    "Neighborhood-Level Median Ratios.",
    "\\newline Blue indicates under-assessment;",
    " Green (0.90–1.1) indicates within standard;",
    " Red indicates over-assessment."
  )
)
```

This is a ratio analysis for **`r town_name` Township** for the `r year_val`
assessment cycle. It includes the 
**`r format(n_original_sales, big.mark = ",")`** most recent sale for each single-card parcel in the past assessment year (between `r min_sale_date` and `r max_sale_date`). Outliers flagged by the data department are removed. Of these,
**`r format(n_excluded_sales, big.mark = ",")`** sales were excluded
as outliers by Valuations analysts, leaving a **final sample of
`r format(n_final_sales, big.mark = ",")` sales**. The township

> contains **`r format(n_total_pins, big.mark = ",")` residential parcels**. This universe includes Single and Multifamily parcels (up to 6 units) and excludes condo units. Prices range from `r ts$price_range`.

Reviewer: What about,

```suggestion
This is a ratio analysis for **`r town_name` Township** for the `r year_val`
assessment cycle. The initial sale sample had 
**`r format(n_original_sales, big.mark = ",")`** sales: this excludes statistical outliers flagged by the Data department, and had transaction dates ranging from `r min_sale_date` to `r max_sale_date`.  From these,
**`r format(n_excluded_sales, big.mark = ",")`** additional sales were excluded
as outliers by Valuations analysts, leaving a **final sample of
`r format(n_final_sales, big.mark = ",")` sales**. The township
contains **`r format(n_total_pins, big.mark = ",")` residential parcels**. This universe includes Single and Multifamily parcels (up to 6 units) and excludes condo units. Prices range from `r ts$price_range` and are not time-adjusted.
```

Reviewer: I can't get the formatting to work for a suggestion, but let's also move the sentence about the total residential parcel count so that it is the last sentence in this paragraph.

  ),
  check.names = FALSE
)

knitr::kable(
  iaao_table,
  format    = "latex",
  escape    = FALSE,
  booktabs  = FALSE,
  linesep   = "",
  col.names = c("Metric", "IAAO Standard", "Model", "Desk Review"),
  align     = c("l", "c", "r", "r")
)
```

```{r fig-2}
#| fig-cap: !expr 'caps$fig2'
#| fig-pos: H
#| fig-cap-location: top
#| fig-height: 3.5
#| fig-width: 6.5

ts_wide <- tibble(
  Metric = met_fac(display_order),
  Model = c(
    ts$model_ratio, ts$model_prb, ts$model_prd,
    ts$model_cod, ts$model_mki
  ),
  `Desk Review` = c(
    ts$desk_review_ratio, ts$desk_review_prb, ts$desk_review_prd,
    ts$desk_review_cod, ts$desk_review_mki
  )
)

ts_long <- ts_wide %>%
  pivot_longer(
    c(Model, `Desk Review`),
    names_to = "Stage", values_to = "Value"
  ) %>%
  mutate(
    Stage  = factor(Stage, levels = c("Model", "Desk Review")),
    digits = metric_meta$digits[match(Metric, metric_meta$name)],
    label  = round(Value, pmin(digits, 2))
  )

iaao_bands <- select(metric_meta, Metric = name, xmin = lo, xmax = hi) %>%
  mutate(Metric = met_fac(Metric))

iaao_meta <- select(metric_meta, Metric = name, mid, half_span) %>%
  mutate(Metric = met_fac(Metric))

> sym_anchors <- ts_long %>%

Reviewer: Can we add some code comments explaining what's happening here, e.g., what's the `out_of_range` being filtered? Can we also comment to explain or use clearer variable names for `sym_anchors` and `ts_long`?

Author: ts was township_stats. Happy to just put that back in as the full variable.

Symetrical anchors refer to the central point in each chart.
This means that if the median ratio is 1.45, it will show the
full range between .5 and 1.5 rather than just extending the
chart in one direction.

    TRUE ~ rc[5]
  )
}

color_ratio_cell <- function(ratio, digits = 3) {
  v <- round(ratio, digits)
  hex <- ratio_to_hex(ratio)
  paste0("\\cellcolor[HTML]{", hex, "} ", v)
}

ratio_fill_scale <- function(name = "Median\nRatio") {
  rc <- paste0("#", pal$ratio_colors)
  scale_fill_gradientn(
    colors   = c(rc[1], rc[2], rc[3], rc[3], rc[4], rc[5]),
    values   = scales::rescale(pal$ratio_values),
    limits   = pal$ratio_limits,
    oob      = scales::squish,
    na.value = paste0("#", pal$ratio_na),
    breaks   = pal$ratio_breaks,
    labels   = sprintf("%.2f", pal$ratio_breaks),
    name     = name
  )
}
```

## Methods

This is a ratio analysis for **`r town_name` Township** for the `r year_val`
assessment cycle. It includes the 
**`r format(n_original_sales, big.mark = ",")`** most recent sales for each single-card parcel in the past assessment year (between `r min_sale_date` and `r max_sale_date`). Outliers flagged by the data department are removed. Of these,
**`r format(n_excluded_sales, big.mark = ",")`** sales were excluded
as outliers by Valuations analysts, leaving a **final sample of
`r format(n_final_sales, big.mark = ",")` sales**. The township

> contains **`r format(n_total_pins, big.mark = ",")` residential parcels**. This universe includes Single and Multifamily parcels (up to 6 units) and excludes condo units. Prices range from `r town_stats$price_range`.

Author: Billy should verify this when he looks at it.

    return(as.character(v))
  }
  hex <- if (passes) "A8DDB5" else "FDBB84"
  paste0("\\cellcolor[HTML]{", hex, "} ", v)
}

ratio_to_hex <- function(ratio) {
  case_when(
    is.na(ratio) ~ "EEEEEE",
    ratio < 0.80 ~ "4575B4",
    ratio < 0.90 ~ "74ADD1",
    ratio < 0.95 ~ "ABD9E9",
    ratio <= 1.05 ~ "66BD63",
    ratio <= 1.10 ~ "FEE08B",
    ratio <= 1.15 ~ "FC8D59",
    TRUE ~ "D73027"
  )
}

color_ratio_cell <- function(ratio, digits = 3) {
  v <- round(ratio, digits)
  hex <- ratio_to_hex(ratio)
  paste0("\\cellcolor[HTML]{", hex, "} ", v)
}

ratio_fill_scale <- function(name = "Median\nRatio") {
  scale_fill_gradientn(
    colors = c(
      "#4575B4", "#74ADD1", "#ABD9E9",
      "#66BD63", "#66BD63", "#66BD63",
      "#FEE08B", "#FC8D59", "#D73027"
    ),
    values = scales::rescale(
      c(0.70, 0.80, 0.90, 0.9499, 0.95, 1.0499, 1.05, 1.15, 1.30)
    ),
    limits = c(0.70, 1.30),
    oob = scales::squish,
    na.value = "gray90",
    breaks = c(0.80, 0.90, 0.95, 1.00, 1.05, 1.10, 1.20),
    labels = c("0.80", "0.90", "0.95", "1.00", "1.05", "1.10", "1.20"),
    name = name
  )
}
```

## Methods

This analysis covers **`r town_name` Township** for the `r year_val`

> assessment cycle. CCAO Data's original sale sample included

Reviewer: Can we specify whether sales val outliers have already been excluded, or whether they are included in this analysis?

**`r format(n_original_sales, big.mark = ",")`** arm's-length sales

> occurring between `r min_sale_date` and `r max_sale_date`, with sale

Reviewer: Do we exclude sales val outliers from this ratio analysis? If we don't, can we? Let's also clearly indicate this in the text. For example, 

```suggestion
This is a ratio analysis for **`r town_name` Township** for the `r year_val`
assessment cycle. The original sale sample included
**`r format(n_original_sales, big.mark = ",")`** arm's-length sales
after outliers were excluded. These sales
occurred between `r min_sale_date` and `r max_sale_date`, with sale
```

prices ranging from `r town_stats$price_range`. Of these,
**`r format(n_excluded_sales, big.mark = ",")`** sales were excluded

> at desk review, leaving a **final sample of

Reviewer: Suggested text change: 

```suggestion
as outliers by Valuations analysts, leaving a **final sample of
```

`r format(n_final_sales, big.mark = ",")` sales**. The township
contains **`r format(n_total_pins, big.mark = ",")` residential
parcels**.

Two sets of values are compared: (1) **Model** values, which are the
output of the model, and (2) **Desk Review** values, which reflect

> CCAO staff adjustments.

Reviewer: Suggested text modifications

```suggestion
This analysis compares ratio statistics from two stages: 
(1) **Model** values, which are the output of the model, and 
(2) **Desk Review** values, which reflect manual adjustments by staff.
```

## Results

```{r cap-desc}
cap_desc <- glue(
  "Descriptive Statistics.",
  "\\newline Summary of model and desk review assessed values and sale prices",
  " across all properties, properties with arm's-length sales used in the",
  " ratio analysis, and properties without qualifying sales.",
  " Note: Some sales are excluded as non-arm's-length transactions,",
  " so 'Sales Used' and 'No Sales' do not sum to 'All Properties'."
)
```

```{r tbl-desc}
#| tbl-cap: !expr 'cap_desc'
#| tbl-pos: H

no_sale <- all_parcels %>% filter(is.na(sale_price))

fmt_n <- function(x) format(x, big.mark = ",")
fmt_dol <- function(x) paste0("\\$", format(round(x), big.mark = ","))
fmt_pct <- function(changed, total) {
  paste0(round(changed / total * 100, 1), "\\%")
}

n_changed <- function(df) {
  sum(!is.na(df$model_value) & !is.na(df$desk_review_value) &
    df$model_value != df$desk_review_value) # nolint: indentation_linter.
}

> desc_table <- tibble(

Reviewer: I like the idea of this table! It compels the reader to think about things they might not have thought to ask. It's very information-dense, though. Hmm. Happy to workshop this together! I'm suggesting some required changes and some optional ones below, but we can chat if that's better.

**[required]** First, let's relabel "No Sales" to the more conventional "Unsold". Then, in our ordering, we should always list "Sold" aud "Unsold" first, and "All Properties" last, to follow a convention of having the "total" at the very end. Finally, I think we should exclude the means in favor of medians, unless maybe there's a reason for including it I'm not thinking of?

**[optional]** I wonder if dividing up the data into two tables might help. What do you think about formatting it so it corresponds to answering two different questions?

Median AVs for sold and unsold properties, per stage

|              |  Model          | Desk Review   |
| -------- | ------------- | -------------- | 
| Sold      | $                    | $                    |
| Unsold  | $                    |  $                   |
| All | $                    |  $                   |

Desk Review changes for Sold and Unsold properties

|              |   N changes        | % of changes |
| -------- | ------------- | -------------- | 
| Sold      | #                    | %                    |
| Unsold  | #                    |  %                   |
| All | #                    |  100%                   |

Author: I included means since the medians often say the same. It shows if there was a general shift up or down in the valuations.

Author: I also added a total AV shift to the bottom table

    fmt_dol(mean(sales_df$model_value, na.rm = TRUE)),
    fmt_dol(median(sales_df$desk_review_value, na.rm = TRUE)),
    fmt_dol(mean(sales_df$desk_review_value, na.rm = TRUE)),
    fmt_dol(median(sales_df$sale_price, na.rm = TRUE)),
    fmt_dol(mean(sales_df$sale_price, na.rm = TRUE))
  ),
  `All Properties` = c(
    fmt_n(nrow(all_parcels)),
    fmt_n(n_changed(all_parcels)),
    fmt_pct(n_changed(all_parcels), nrow(all_parcels)),
    fmt_dol(median(all_parcels$model_value, na.rm = TRUE)),
    fmt_dol(mean(all_parcels$model_value, na.rm = TRUE)),
    fmt_dol(median(all_parcels$desk_review_value, na.rm = TRUE)),
    fmt_dol(mean(all_parcels$desk_review_value, na.rm = TRUE)),
    "---",
    "---"
  ),
  `No Sales` = c(
    fmt_n(nrow(no_sale)),
    "---",
    "---",
    fmt_dol(median(no_sale$model_value, na.rm = TRUE)),
    fmt_dol(mean(no_sale$model_value, na.rm = TRUE)),
    fmt_dol(median(no_sale$desk_review_value, na.rm = TRUE)),
    fmt_dol(mean(no_sale$desk_review_value, na.rm = TRUE)),
    "---",
    "---"
  )
)

knitr::kable(
  desc_table,
  format    = "latex",
  escape    = FALSE,
  booktabs  = FALSE,
  linesep   = "",
  align     = c("l", "r", "r", "r")
)
```

> ```{r cap-1}

Reviewer: I like the descriptive stats table, and normally, conventions would demand it be first! But can we move the `Town-Level IAAO Statistics` Table up so that it is Table 1 and is the first result listed?

Reasoning:
* Our stakeholders are busy and might not make it past the first page.
* This table is very clear, and indicates (for the Worth output) that both the model and DR stages met IAAO stats. This is really helpful context for readers who then go on to read the rest of the report
* Your intro has some helpful descriptive stats, like the total sample and population sizes.

cap_fig1 <- glue(
  "Town-Level IAAO Statistics.",
  "\\newline Green shading meets IAAO standard; orange shading does not."
)
```

```{r tbl-1}
#| tbl-cap: !expr 'cap_fig1'
#| tbl-pos: H

ts <- town_stats

iaao_table <- data.frame(
  Metric = c("Median Ratio", "COD", "PRD", "PRB", "MKI", "N Sales"),
  `IAAO Standard` = c(
    "0.90 -- 1.10",
    "5.0 -- 15.0",
    "0.98 -- 1.03",
    "$\\pm$0.05",
    "0.90 -- 1.10",
    "---"
  ),
  Model = c(
    iaao_color_cell("Median Ratio", ts$model_ratio, digits = 3),
    iaao_color_cell("COD", ts$model_cod, digits = 1),
    iaao_color_cell("PRD", ts$model_prd, digits = 4),
    iaao_color_cell("PRB", ts$model_prb, digits = 4),
    iaao_color_cell("MKI", ts$model_mki, digits = 4),

>     format(ts$number_of_sales, big.mark = ",")

Reviewer: Proposing striking the num of sales from the IAAO stats summary table, because you summarize it pretty clearly in the intro text and in descriptive stats tables.

```suggestion
```

  ),
  `Desk Review` = c(
    iaao_color_cell("Median Ratio", ts$desk_review_ratio, digits = 3),
    iaao_color_cell("COD", ts$desk_review_cod, digits = 1),
    iaao_color_cell("PRD", ts$desk_review_prd, digits = 4),
    iaao_color_cell("PRB", ts$desk_review_prb, digits = 4),
    iaao_color_cell("MKI", ts$desk_review_mki, digits = 4),
    format(ts$number_of_sales, big.mark = ",")
  ),
  check.names = FALSE
)

knitr::kable(
  iaao_table,
  format    = "latex",
  escape    = FALSE,
  booktabs  = FALSE,
  linesep   = "",
  col.names = c("Metric", "IAAO Standard", "Model", "Desk Review"),
  align     = c("l", "c", "r", "r")
)
```

```{r nbhd-ratios-prep}
nbhd_ratios <- all_parcels %>%
  filter(!is.na(sale_price), !sale_excluded %in% TRUE) %>%
  mutate(neighborhood_number = gsub("-", "", neighborhood_number)) %>%
  summarize(
    model_ratio = median(model_sale_ratio, na.rm = TRUE),
    dr_ratio    = median(desk_review_sale_ratio, na.rm = TRUE),
    n_sales     = n(),
    .by         = neighborhood_number
  )
```

{{< pagebreak >}}

> ```{r cap-2}

Reviewer: Let's also move our Table of `Neighborhood-Level Median Ratios` to be right under the map of nbhds. That way, users get to peruse stats in the following order:
* Township
* Deciles
* NBHDs

cap_fig2 <- glue(
  "Neighborhood-Level Median Ratios.",
  "\\newline Blue indicates under-assessment;",

>   " Green (0.95–1.05) indicates near-standard;",

Reviewer: Can we fix this so that 
```suggestion
  " Green (0.90–1.1) indicates within standard;",
```

    iaao_color_cell("PRD", ts$desk_review_prd, digits = 4),
    iaao_color_cell("PRB", ts$desk_review_prb, digits = 4),
    iaao_color_cell("MKI", ts$desk_review_mki, digits = 4),
    format(ts$number_of_sales, big.mark = ",")
  ),
  check.names = FALSE
)

knitr::kable(
  iaao_table,
  format    = "latex",
  escape    = FALSE,
  booktabs  = FALSE,
  linesep   = "",
  col.names = c("Metric", "IAAO Standard", "Model", "Desk Review"),
  align     = c("l", "c", "r", "r")
)
```

```{r desc-helpers}
no_sale <- all_parcels %>% filter(is.na(sale_price))

fmt_n <- function(x) format(x, big.mark = ",")
fmt_dol <- function(x) paste0("\\$", format(round(x), big.mark = ","))
fmt_pct <- function(changed, total) {
  paste0(round(changed / total * 100, 1), "\\%")
}
n_changed <- function(df) {
  sum(!is.na(df$model_value) & !is.na(df$desk_review_value) &
    df$model_value != df$desk_review_value) # nolint: indentation_linter.
}
total_shift <- function(df) {
  changed <- !is.na(df$model_value) & !is.na(df$desk_review_value) &
    df$model_value != df$desk_review_value # nolint: indentation_linter.
  sum(df$desk_review_value[changed] - df$model_value[changed], na.rm = TRUE)

> }

Author: I think we can just keep it with the median and mean MV of properties. This was just an alternative to the mean.
